FF-SRL: High Performance GPU-Based Surgical Simulation For Robot
Learning

arXiv:2503.18616v2 [cs.RO] 3 Jun 2025

Diego Dall’Alba1,2,∗ , Michał Naskr˛et1,∗ , Sabina Kamińska1 and Przemysław Korzeniowski1,†
Abstract— Robotic surgery is a rapidly developing field that
can greatly benefit from the automation of surgical tasks.
However, training techniques such as Reinforcement Learning
(RL) require a high number of task repetitions, which are
generally unsafe and impractical to perform on real surgical
systems. This stresses the need for simulated surgical environments, which are not only realistic, but also computationally
efficient and scalable. We introduce FF-SRL (Fast and Flexible
Surgical Reinforcement Learning), a high-performance learning
environment for robotic surgery. In FF-SRL both physics
simulation and RL policy training reside entirely on a single
GPU. This avoids typical bottlenecks associated with data
transfer between the CPU and GPU, leading to accelerated
learning rates. Our results show that FF-SRL reduces the
training time of a complex tissue manipulation task by an
order of magnitude, down to a couple of minutes, compared to
a common CPU/GPU simulator. Such speed-up may facilitate
the experimentation with RL techniques and contribute to the
development of new generation of surgical systems. To this end,
we make our code publicly available to the community.

I. INTRODUCTION
Robot-Assisted Surgical Systems (RASS) are becoming
more popular and widely used, with a constant increase in
their adoption in the last two decades [1]. Researchers are
also exploring new possibilities and challenges of RASS,
using platforms like da Vinci Research Kit (dVRK) [2].
One of the most interesting research topics is how to
automate some aspects of RASS interventions, making these
systems more autonomous and efficient [3]. A common
approach is to use Reinforcement Learning (RL) techniques
[4]–[8], which have proven to be effective in other robotic
domains, such as legged locomotion and dexterous manipulation [9]. RL can support RASS in performing various
surgical tasks that require adaptability and precision, such as
manipulation of deformable tissues [7, 10] or suture needle
[11, 12] and removing debris or liquids [4]–[6].
The publication was created within the project of the Minister of Science
and Higher Education "Support for the activity of Centers of Excellence
established in Poland under Horizon 2020" on the basis of the contract
number MEiN/2023/DIR/3796. This project has received funding from
the EU’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant
agreement No 857533. This publication is supported by Sano project carried
out within the International Research Agendas programme of the Foundation
for Polish Science, co-financed by the EU under the European Regional
Development Fund. We acknowledge Polish high-performance computing
infrastructure PLGrid (HPC Center: ACK Cyfronet AGH) for providing
computer facilities and support within the grant no. PLG/2020/013635
* These authors contributed equally to the paper. Ordered alphabetically.
1 Sano Centre for Computational Medicine, Kraków, Poland
https://sano.science/
2 Department of Engineering for Innovation Medicine, University of
Verona, Italy
† Corresponding author: Przemysław Korzeniowski (email:
p.korzeniowski@sanoscience.org)

Simulation
(warp)

RL
(pytorch)

FF-SRL

rl_games

step,
actions arrays,
environments
states

actions tensors,
step command

Environment wrapper

rewards tensors,
observations

observations, actions, rewards

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the integration between the proposed
FF-SRL simulator and the rl_games RL framework to achieve a fully GPU
training pipeline and support the development of autonomous RASS.

RL-based systems are usually trained in simulated environments, as many unsuccessful attempts are required which
often exhibit unsafe behavior [9]. This is especially true for
RASS, since performing real experiments faces significant
economic and ethical constraints. However, to transfer the
trained models in real settings, it is necessary to employ
realistic, scalable, and robust simulations, supporting softbody physics [7, 10]. Several simulators for RASS have been
proposed, focusing on specific aspects, such as the kinematic
model of the robot [4], more realistic physical [8] or visual
[5] simulation or easier interfacing with real RASS [6]. All
these simulators mainly exploit CPU calculations, relegating
the use of the GPU to accelerate the training and inference
part of the RL model only.
This is not optimal as it requires copying the data back
and forth between CPU (simulation) and GPU (learning)
memories . As such, it limits the complexity of the tasks that
can be solved and, as a result, slows down research activities
and community contributions. The solution is to compute
the entire simulation and RL training process on the GPU.
However, developing a massively-parallel GPU simulation
is non-trivial. Its efficient implementation requires a careful
handling of thousands of simultaneous threads and efficient
global memory access patterns.
In this work we therefore propose:
a high-performance, fully GPU-based simulator for
surgical robotics, called FF-SRL, that supports soft
tissue modeling via extended position based dynamics
approach;
• the integration of FF-SRL into an entirely GPU-based
RL training pipeline;
• the experimental validation of the proposed FF-SRL in
•

a fundamental surgical task (i.e. reaching a deformable
tissue), comparing with simulator proposed in [8].
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that
proposes a simulation environment for training autonomous
RASS with RL techniques entirely on GPU, and the results
confirm that our approach is able to significantly improve
the performance compared to available RASS simulators, e.g.
completing RL training in less than 2 minutes instead of over
1 hour. This enables training of complex learning tasks even
on a commonly accessible consumer-grade hardware such as
gaming laptops.
We make the simulator code publicly available1 to encourage the community to adopt our approach and accelerate the
progress of this promising research area.

simulators, LapGym implements a rich catalog of surgical
tasks, most based on interaction with deformable objects.
Thus, we propose a novel simulator that offers an entirely GPU-integrated RL simulation and training approach
for RASS. Unlike described simulators that combine CPU
calculations with a limited GPU-accelerated part, FF-SRL
leverages the full power of GPU computing to optimize the
overall process. To tackle the complexity of the simulation of
highly non-linear behavior of tissues FF-SRL uses eXtended
Postion-Based Dynamics (XPBD [28]). Several recent papers
[29]–[33], turned XPBD into a serious competitor of more
advanced simulation methods in terms of accuracy, stability,
speed, and simplicity.
III. METHODS

II. RELATED WORKS
Research activities on RASS have been exploring the
automation of various surgical tasks: these tasks range from
simple ones, such as peg transfer [13]–[15], to more complex ones, such as manipulating suture needles [11, 12] or
deformable tissues [16]–[19]. Among these tasks, we focus
on tissue retraction, a preliminary phase of most surgical
interventions. Tissue retraction involves lifting deformable
tissue to expose an area of interest, such as an organ or lesion
to be removed (see Fig. 2). This task is widely used by the
RASS research community since it is simple to set up but,
at the same time, with an adequate level of complexity for
testing the developed automation approaches. Furthermore,
this task can be learned in simulation and transferred to a
real environment [7, 10, 20].
As task complexity has increased, there has been a
growing interest in applying more complex automation approaches, such as RL techniques. RL allows the inclusion of
multi-agent models [21], safety constraints [22], or demonstrations by expert users [12, 20, 23], also through interactive
supervision [24]. To make RL training more effective, it is
a common practice to carry it out in realistic simulation
environments. Several simulation environments have been
proposed for RASS. Some of them are based on rigid objects
only, such as dVRL [4] and SurRoL [5]. dVRL provides
an accurate kinematic model of the dVRK platform and
simulates simple training or surgical tasks. SurRoL provides
around ten surgical tasks supported by a more realistic visual
rendering. Another simulator is AMBF-RL [6], which extends Articulated Multi-Body Framework (AMBF) [25] simulator specific for RL training and ensures simple interfacing
with the real setup. However, none of these simulators exploit
the simulation of deformable objects, which are essential for
many surgical tasks. UnityFlexML [7] was the first simulator
to address this issue by taking advantage of the PositionBased Dynamics (PBD) approach provided by NVIDIA Flex
and integrating it within the Unity framework. LapGym [8]
recently proposed a more advanced simulation environment,
which relies on the accurate biomechanical finite element
simulation provided by SOFA [26, 27]. Compared to other
1 https://github.com/SanoScience/FF-SRL

In this section, we describe the proposed simulation environment, detailing the implementation choices regarding
soft tissue simulation, RASS tools and collisions. Next, we
describe how we included support for RL environments. We
point out that some implementation choices have sacrificed
pure computational performance in favor of a software
architecture that simplifies maintenance and extensibility.
A. Simulation framework
FF-SRL implements an XPBD simulation technique [28],
based on NVIDIA Warp [34], which is a Python framework
for writing high-performance GPU-optimized simulation and
graphics code. While Warp provides an XPBD implementation, we have implemented a version specifically optimized
to handle the complexity of RASS simulation, including nonlinear tissue behavior.
In particular, the proposed XPBD implementation improves the effectiveness of constraint solver iterations in
simulating complex deformable objects. We split each time
step into n smaller sub-steps and apply a single constraint iteration of PBD in each sub-step. This method, first suggested
in [29], is more effective than performing a single large
time-step with n constraint solver iterations. This approach
has been further validated in [31], where a comprehensive
rigid body solver was implemented to handle various joint
types and the interaction with soft objects in a unified
way. This is particularly useful in RASS, allowing easy
interaction between rigid surgical tools and soft tissues. The
authors of [28, 31] compared PBD with sub-stepping to
more advanced solvers, both implicit and explicit, and found
that it produces visually similar results while maintaining
the simplicity of the original PBD method and reducing the
sensitivity to matrix ill-conditioning.
1) Implementation of soft-body physics: Each object is
represented by a set of V vertices with masses mi , where
i = {1, · · · , V }, a position xi and velocity vi . Vertices
are embedded within a volumetric tetrahedral mesh and the
objects’ surface is divided into F triangle faces. Two adjacent
vertices are combined into an edge. Two sets of constraints
are used to provide object deformability with minimal computation required – conserving distance between points C d

and volume of tetrahedrons C v . Each constraint imposes
corrections ∆xi on corresponding vertices’ positions.
The distance constraint C d is realized by the following
corrections for vertices a, b residing on a given edge:
xa,b
wa
∆xda = −ks
(|xa,b | − da,b )
,
wa + wb
|xa,b |
(1)
xa,b
wb
(|xa,b | − da,b )
,
∆xdb = +ks
wa + wb
|xa,b |
where xa,b = xa − xb , wa , wb are inverse masses of the
vertices a and b, da,b is the rest distance between vertices
a, b calculated before the simulation loop, and ks ∈ [0, 1] is
the constraint stiffness.
The volume constraint C v = 61 (xb,a × xc,a ) · xd,a − V0
(where V0 is the rest volume of the tetrahedron) is calculated
by the following corrections for the vertices a, b, c, d residing
on a given tetrahedron:
1
∆xva = − skv ·
6
(xb,a × xc,a + xc,a × xd,a + xd,a × xb,a ),
1
∆xvb = − skv (xb,a × xc,a ),
(2)
6
1
∆xvc = − skv (xc,a × xd,a ),
6
1
v
∆xd = − skv (xb,a × xd,b ),
6
where kv is the stiffness and s is scaling factor:
s= P

Cv

.
v 2
i∈{a,b,c,d} |∇xi C |

(3)

We parallelized the algorithm using Jacobi-style constraint
solver and atomic add function. In this case all the constraints can be calculated in parallel and atomically added
as a vertex’ total correction. Subsequently, the correction is
averaged by the number of constraints applied to the vertex
to obtain the final position correction ∆x = ∆x/n. The
stiffness parameters ks and kv are adopted from previous
studies [7, 16, 19].
Tissue connections between different objects are implemented as distance constraints between adjacent vertices of
one mesh and geometrical centers of triangles of other mesh.
The constraint is applied with position correction ∆xc .
An overview of the algorithm loop is presented in Algorithm 1 with g being the gravity constant.
2) Surgical tool model: The surgical tool model employs
two layers: visual and computational. The former is only a
graphical representation of instrument mesh and the latter
is used for collision detection. The computational model
consists of three capsules: one acting as a rod corresponding
to instrument’s shaft, and two acting as clamps. The clamps
are nested at the end of the rod and can pivot around their
fixed point with angle 0◦ < α < 30◦ from their symmetry
axis.
We considered a simplified model of the movement of the
instruments, but still representative of those used in minimally invasive surgical procedures, including RASS ones
[4, 8]. We did not consider the distal wrist joints in this

Algorithm 1 Simulation algorithm.
1: set initial positions x0 and velocities v0
2: h ← ∆t/simSubSteps
3: k ← 0
4: while i < simSteps do
5:
evaluate instrument state
6:
while j < simSubSteps do
7:
predict velocity: ṽ ← vk + hg
8:
predict position: x̃ ← xk + hṽ
9:
initialize corrections: ∆x̃ ← 0
10:
for all vertices do
11:
∆x̃ ← ∆x̃ + ∆x̃d + ∆x̃g + ∆x̃c
12:
end for
13:
for all tetrahedra do
14:
∆x̃ ← ∆x̃ + ∆x̃v
15:
end for
16:
x̃ ← x̃ + ∆x̃/n
17:
vk+1 ← (x̃ − xk )/h
18:
xk+1 ← x̃
19:
k ←k+1
20:
j ←j+1
21:
end while
22:
evaluate collisions
23:
i←i+1
24: end while

initial implementation, since most RL work in RASS does
not control the orientation of the tool, keeping it constant
[7, 10, 20, 22]. The main constraint that must be satisfied
is imposed by the access port (i.e. the trocar) necessary to
pass through the patient’s abdominal wall. Therefore, the tool
can rotate freely with respect to the access point pRCM and
translate along the shaft axis [8]. However, the control of the
instrument is commonly carried out in Cartesian space, so
we have implemented a simple mapping of the instrument’s
movements.
As represented in Fig. 2, given the instrument in two
different poses to which the distal points (center of the
grasper) p1 and p2 correspond. Given the position of the
constraint point pRCM , we can calculate the vectors v1 =
p1 −pRCM and v2 = p2 −pRCM . Given these vectors it is
possible to calculate the rotation angle θ and the respective
axis rA with the formulas:


v1 · v2
v1 × v2
−1
θ = cos
, rA =
(4)
||v1 || · ||v2 ||
||v1 || · ||v2 ||
These rotations satisfy the pRCM constraint, while the
translation component can be obtained from ||v1 − v2 ||.
The surgical tool model has a predetermined dragging
point positioned at the end of closed clamps (see points p1
and p2 in Fig. 2). When the angle between clamps is lower
than 3◦ the algorithm checks for the closest vertex in radius
rl . If a vertex is found in the radius rl then a dragging
constraint is applied to the mesh and the dragging point.
When the angle between clamps exceeds 3◦ all the dragging
constraints are deactivated. Dragging simulation is carried

TABLE I
H YPERPARAMETERS OF PPO USED FOR THE EXPERIMENTS . T HE STEPS
BEFORE PPO UPDATE ARE SUMMED OVER ALL ENVIRONMENTS AND
lin(x) IS A LINEAR SCHEDULE STARTING AT x AND ENDING AT 0
Hyperparameter
Total simulation steps
Steps before update
Discount factor γ
Clip range value func.
Value function coeff.
Max. gradient norm

Fig. 2.
Representation of the instrument movement model, required
to ensure compliance with the remote center of motion; see the main
text for further details. In the subfigure outlined in green, we show an
example frame of tissue retraction procedure simulation created within our
framework, including a model of the RASS instrument (orange shaft and
red gripper), deformable fat tissue (yellow), and rigid supporting base (dark
gray), including a target area of interest (purple).

out as creating an additional distance constraint with ks = 1
between the dragging point and a mesh vertex. The constraint
is applied with position correction ∆xg . All vertices have
an additional variable that stores the boolean value of the
dragging constraint state.
3) Collisions: In order to provide a robust solution for
collision detection between mesh triangles and the surgical
tool model we employ Signed Distance Field (SDF) approach. SDFs are a popular choice for the collision detection
shapes due to their performance [19]. We follow the perelement local optimisation scheme to find intersection points
between SDFs and continuous surfaces proposed in [30].
Each capsule of the grasper model is treated as a SDF and
its penetration is checked against the mesh’ faces.
For each intersecting face an additional distance constraint
is introduced, that is applied after deformation constraints
are calculated. The constraint pushes the face out of the
grasper SDFs in the direction of penetration vector and
proportionally to the penetration depth with stiffness of
kc = 1.
B. Reinforcement learning integration
The developed simulator was integrated with the rl_games
framework, which provides highly optimized end-to-end
GPU implementation of several RL algorithms [35]. These
implementations vectorize observations and actions on the
GPU allowing to fully exploit the parallelization provided
by the developed simulator. As represented in Fig. 1, an
efficient wrapping module has been implemented to support
the simulator which takes care of transferring data between
the simulator and the RL algorithm, taking advantage of the

Value
5 · 105
1024
0.995
0.2
0.5
0.5

Hyperparameter
Minibatch size
Update epochs
λGAE
Clip range
Entropy coeff.
Learning rate

Value
256
4
0.95
lin(0.1)
0.0
lin(2.5 · 10−4 )

primitives provided by Warp for interfacing with PyTorch
framework used by rl_games. The latter allow for CUDA
interoperability between Warp arrays and PyTorch tensors
without copying the underlying data.
The interface between the developed simulator and
rl_games package is also used to calculate, transform and
transfer the necessary data for the RL process. Namely,
episode rewards are calculated and scaled, observations are
extracted from the simulation, and actions are applied when
calling the simulation’s step function once per simulation
step. The interface also checks for termination conditions,
i.e. the limit on the number of steps and task fulfillment
conditions.
For each variable required in the calculations (e.g. vertices,
faces, tetrahedrons and tensors containing the information for
the RL agent) one GPU array is created and data from each
environment is concatenated and stored in the array.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
The experiments have the dual objective of evaluating
the performance of the FF-SRL simulator alone and the
integration into the RL training process. We are considering
tissue retraction since it is a widely used task in validating
autonomous RASS, as described in Section II. The environment, presented in Fig. 2, replicates the characteristics of
the one proposed in [8, 10, 17, 19]. In addition to the RASS
tool, there is a camera with the point of view shown in the
figure, a rigid base in which an area of interest is presented
and to which the soft tissue is fixed along the side furthest
from the camera. The movement of the tool is implemented
in Cartesian space, as described in Section III-A.2. The
proposed method is compared with LapGym [8] since it
provides a reference implementation of the tissue retraction
task with a realistic CPU simulation of the deformable tissue
based on a finite element model.
We initially evaluate only the simulation performance and
scaling capabilities of the proposed simulator in terms of
environments running in parallel and as the complexity of
the biomechanical model of the simulated tissue increases
(obtained by increasing the number of vertices of the tissue
model). For each environment, we consider the fps generated
from niter = 500000 simulation steps performed without
any RL training process running. The measurements do not
consider initialization times to ensure a fair comparison with
the data obtained during RL training [9].

TABLE II
F RAMES PER SECOND AS THE NUMBER OF ENVIRONMENTS RUNNING IN PARALLEL ( LEFT ) OR THE COMPLEXITY OF THE BIO - MECHANICAL MODEL
( RIGHT ) INCREASES FOR THE SIMULATION ENVIRONMENTS CONSIDERED . T HE REPORTED VALUES ARE IN THE FORM MEAN ± STANDARD DEVIATION
CALCULATED OVER 5 RUNS INITIALIZED WITH RANDOM SEEDS .
Number of
Enviroments
1
4
8
16
32
64
80

Simulation Only
FF-SRL
LapGym
2964.6 ± 40.6
77.7 ± 0.7
9093.2 ± 132.8
205.8 ± 7.2
14021.3 ± 193.4
226.1 ± 11.5
19032.9 ± 98.1
–
21662.2 ± 145.3
–
23728.7 ± 314
–
23932.7 ± 317.4
–

RL Setup
FF-SRL
LapGym
434.3 ± 8
68 ± 1.1
1527.3 ± 34
173.8 ± 8.4
2636.7 ± 40.7
192.3 ± 9.9
3955.4 ± 202.1
–
4992 ± 335.7
–
–
–
–
–

We then evaluate the FF-SRL simulator applied to RL
training, considering the first phase of the tissue retraction
task, which consists of reaching a point on the surface of
the soft tissue. This choice is consistent with the approach
in [6] and replicates the task of reaching anatomical areas of
interest which is fundamental for most surgical activities, as
adopted by [4, 5]. In this task, the instrument starts from
a fixed point above the tissue and reaches a fixed target
point on the tissue surface. The training is based on the
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) algorithm [36] since it
is considered a suitable baseline, given its wide successful
applications in heterogeneous fields [9], including RASS
[7, 8, 10, 22]. However, the simulation conforms to OpenAI
gym [37] standard and can therefore be applied to other RL
algorithms and libraries in a straightforward way.
Although FF-SRL supports the use of generated endoscopic images, we consider state observations that contain the
position of the instrument and the target point to be reached,
combined with the reward R = wl l + wd d + ws s ; where
l is the distance between the end-effector and the target, d
is the change of l with respect to previous simulation step
and s is a success flag normally at 0 and set to 1 when the
distance l < 3 mm. The weights wl , wd , ws are set to -1, -10
and 100, respectively.
The training is carried out for niter = 500000 steps using
the parameters reported in Table I, replicating those used in
[8]. The public code repository also provides further details
on parameters and implementation choices. Performances are
measured by considering the overall training time and analyzing the rewards obtained. All experiments are performed
on a laptop with an Intel i7-9750HF CPU @ 2.60GHz, 16
GB RAM, and an NVIDIA RTX 2060 Mobile GPU with
6GB VRAM. At the time of writing, this configuration is
low-range and easily accessible to most researchers.
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
All the data reported refers to the statistics calculated
on 5 different executions, considering different initialization
seeds. In Table II (left), we report the performance of FFSRL and the baseline considered (LapGym [8]), in terms of
average and standard deviation of frames per second (fps) obtained as a function of the number of environments executed
in parallel. The first two columns show the performance considering only the simulation, while the others also consider

Number of
Tetrahedral
1170
1431
2880
9729
52359

Simulation Only
FF-SRL
LapGym
2964.6 ± 40.6
77.7 ± 0.7
2798.3 ± 118
73.6 ± 2.1
2751.9 ± 119.3
48.2 ± 1.3
2302.2 ± 44.5
37.7 ± 0.4
905.5 ± 29
9.6 ± 0.1

the RL training. On the system configuration considered,
FF-SRL is able to run up to 80 environments in parallel,
providing a constant increase in the throughput, starting from
the 2964.6 ± 40.6 obtained with a single environment, up to
23728.7 ± 314 with 64 environments, and then saturating
the resources available at 80 environments with a result of
23932.7 ± 317.4, slightly above the configuration with 64
environments. We also ran FF-SRL on an NVIDIA A100
GPU and managed to run 1125 environments in parallel.
This demonstrates how FF-SRL environment can scale even
on high-performance computing systems.
For reference, the LapGym’s simulation alone with a
single environment is capable of achieving 77.7 ± 0.7 fps,
more than 38x slower than FF-SRL. A similar performance
difference is also observed if we consider 4 and 8 environments running in parallel, where FF-SRL provides over 40x
and 60x speedup, respectively. This is an expected result,
since LapGym is based on the SOFA simulation framework,
which relies on a bio-mechanical finite element model solved
entirely on the CPU.
When evaluating pure simulation performance, it is interesting to analyze the fps of a single environment as
the complexity of the biomechanical simulation varies, as
reported in Table II (right). In the second row, we can see
how an increase of approximately 20% in the number of
vertices of the tissue model leads to a reduction in fps of
about 5% for both simulators. The situation changes starting
from the third row, in which a model with approximately
2.5 times the vertices of the initial one leads to a reduction
in fps of around 8% for FF-SRL, while for Lapgym the
reduction is around 40%. The last two rows of the tables
confirm the capability of FF-SRL to manage models with
an even higher number of vertices, i.e. 9729 and 52359,
respectively, unlike Lapgym, which sees performance halved
and even collapses below 10 fps in the case of the most
complex model considered. This result demonstrates how the
optimized XPBD implementation on which FF-SRL is based
can optimally handle the complex simulations of deformable
structures required in RASS applications
Considering the performance in terms of RL training, we
report in the third and fourth columns of Table II (left), the
statistics on the fps obtained from FF-SRL and Lapgym,
respectively. Even in this context, we can observe how FFSRL obtains a higher fps throughput than LapGym, provid-

Fig. 3. Average training time for niter = 500000 steps, considering
different number of environment running in parallel.

ing significant performance increases. If we consider a single
environment, FF-SRL yields a performance increase of over
6x with respect to Lapgym. If we consider 4 environments,
we have an increase of more than 8.5x, which becomes
over 13.5x with 8 environments, the maximum number
of environments supported by LapGym on the hardware
configuration considered. However, FF-SRL can also run 16
and 32 environments in parallel, providing a further increase
in performance compared to the configuration of 8 Lapgym
environments, of 20 and 26 times respectively. We should
note that we were not able to run more than 32 FF-SRL
environments during RL training on the considered system.
This reduction compared to the simulation alone, capable
of reaching 80 environments, is linked to the limits of the
graphics memory. The limit of 80 simulation environments in
parallel is rather connected to the available system memory,
since instantiating the simulation requires creating large
arrays as described in Section III-B. It will certainly be an
element that we will improve, optimizing the data types used
and memory management by limiting the initial copies of
data between Warp and Pytorch.
As seen in Table II (left), the FPS reduction from simulation only to full RL pipeline is significant in FF-SRL
as the simulation steps take only small fraction of the time
needed for full RL processing. For Lapgym the simulation
steps time is a major contribution to the RL processing time
and therefore the reduction is less pronounced.
Considering the overall RL training times shown in Fig. 3,
the proposed simulator with a single environment completes
training in less than 24 minutes compared to over 5 hours for
the baseline. If we consider the maximum possible performances, we can complete the training in less than 2 minutes
(32 environments configurations), guaranteeing a speedup
of over 45 times compared to the 8 LapGym environment
condition. Even comparing the 8 FF-SRL environments with
the equivalent LapGym number, the speedup is still more
than 20 times. It is important to observe how FF-SRL by
going from 1 to 4 environments allows to reduce the training
time by over 3.5 times, while LapGym achieves a reduction
of approximately 2.6 times. Comparing the transition from 4
to 8 environments, FF-SRL obtains a time reduction of approximately 44%, compared to approximately 33% obtained

Fig. 4.

Average episode reward with respect to steps.

by LapGym. These results confirm the scalability of FF-SRL
with respect to the number of parallel environments.
Fig. 4 shows the curves of the average reward obtained
per episode compared to the total number of steps. All
the configurations considered are able to train an RL agent
capable of solving the task considered (corresponding to a
reward greater than 80). The convergence of RL training in
FF-SRL and Lapgym is closely overlapping, guaranteeing a
correct solution of the task already after 250,000 steps. This
fact allows us to observe that the times reported in Fig. 3,
which consider all 500,000 training steps, are overestimated
and probably about half the time is sufficient to solve the
considered task.
In this work, we did not optimize the training hyperparameters to ensure a fair comparison with the baseline. Optimization of these parameters could favor a further increase
in performance and allow the management of even more
complex tasks, such as complete tissue retraction or tasks that
require the use of two instruments. These tasks have already
been demonstrated to be able to be transferred effectively
between simulator and reality [7, 10, 20]. Tests with the real
robot will be carried out in the future to demonstrate the
capabilities of FF-SRL to also interface with real robotic
systems, exploiting ROS middleware. In the future, we will
also focus on the optimization of some technical aspects,
such as improving the implementation of inverse kinematics
to support all degrees of freedom of the dVRK and extending
the evaluation to visual RL methods.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented FF-SRL, a GPU-based simulation environment for robotic surgery that leverages an
advanced XPBD simulation of deformable tissue. We showed
that FF-SRL can significantly speed up the RL training
process for surgical tasks, achieving higher frame-rates and
faster training time than other available simulators. We also
demonstrated the scalability and efficiency of our simulation
environment, which can run on a single low-end GPU
device. Our work opens up new possibilities for developing
autonomous surgical systems using RL techniques, as well
as for studying the interaction between robots and soft tissue.
We hope that our code and simulator will be useful for the
research community and foster further advances in this field.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors want to thank Paul Maria Scheikl from
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg and
Miles Macklin from Nvidia for valuable support.
R EFERENCES
[1] C. D’Ettorre, A. Mariani, A. Stilli, F. R. y Baena, P. Valdastri,
A. Deguet, P. Kazanzides, R. H. Taylor, G. S. Fischer, S. P. DiMaio,
et al., “Accelerating surgical robotics research: A review of 10
years with the da vinci research kit,” IEEE Robotics & Automation
Magazine, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 56–78, 2021.
[2] P. Kazanzides, Z. Chen, A. Deguet, G. S. Fischer, R. H. Taylor,
and S. P. DiMaio, “An open-source research kit for the da vinci®
surgical system,” in 2014 IEEE international conference on robotics
and automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2014, pp. 6434–6439.
[3] P. Fiorini, K. Y. Goldberg, Y. Liu, and R. H. Taylor, “Concepts and
trends in autonomy for robot-assisted surgery,” Proceedings of the
IEEE, vol. 110, no. 7, pp. 993–1011, 2022.
[4] F. Richter, R. K. Orosco, and M. C. Yip, “Open-sourced reinforcement learning environments for surgical robotics,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1903.02090, 2019.
[5] J. Xu, B. Li, B. Lu, Y.-H. Liu, Q. Dou, and P.-A. Heng, “Surrol:
An open-source reinforcement learning centered and dvrk compatible
platform for surgical robot learning,” in 2021 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2021,
pp. 1821–1828.
[6] V. M. Varier, D. K. Rajamani, F. Tavakkolmoghaddam, A. Munawar,
and G. S. Fischer, “Ambf-rl: A real-time simulation based reinforcement learning toolkit for medical robotics,” in 2022 International
Symposium on Medical Robotics (ISMR). IEEE, 2022, pp. 1–8.
[7] E. Tagliabue, A. Pore, D. Dall’Alba, E. Magnabosco, M. Piccinelli, and
P. Fiorini, “Soft tissue simulation environment to learn manipulation
tasks in autonomous robotic surgery,” in 2020 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2020,
pp. 3261–3266.
[8] P. M. Scheikl, B. Gyenes, R. Younis, C. Haas, G. Neumann, M. Wagner, and F. Mathis-Ullrich, “Lapgym–an open source framework for
reinforcement learning in robot-assisted laparoscopic surgery,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.09606, 2023.
[9] V. Makoviychuk, L. Wawrzyniak, Y. Guo, M. Lu, K. Storey, M. Macklin, D. Hoeller, N. Rudin, A. Allshire, A. Handa, et al., “Isaac gym:
High performance gpu based physics simulation for robot learning,”
in Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2), 2021.
[10] P. M. Scheikl, E. Tagliabue, B. Gyenes, M. Wagner, D. Dall’Alba,
P. Fiorini, and F. Mathis-Ullrich, “Sim-to-real transfer for visual
reinforcement learning of deformable object manipulation for robotassisted surgery,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 560–567, 2023.
[11] Z.-Y. Chiu, F. Richter, E. K. Funk, R. K. Orosco, and M. C. Yip,
“Bimanual regrasping for suture needles using reinforcement learning
for rapid motion planning,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2021, pp. 7737–7743.
[12] K. L. Schwaner, D. Dall’Alba, P. T. Jensen, P. Fiorini, and T. R.
Savarimuthu, “Autonomous needle manipulation for robotic surgical
suturing based on skills learned from demonstration,” in 2021 IEEE
17th international conference on automation science and engineering
(CASE). IEEE, 2021, pp. 235–241.
[13] Z. J. Hu, Z. Wang, Y. Huang, A. Sena, F. R. y Baena, and E. Burdet,
“Towards human-robot collaborative surgery: Trajectory and strategy
learning in bimanual peg transfer,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, 2023.
[14] D. Meli, P. Fiorini, and M. Sridharan, “Towards inductive learning of
surgical task knowledge: A preliminary case study of the peg transfer
task,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 176, pp. 440–449, 2020.
[15] M. Hwang, B. Thananjeyan, D. Seita, J. Ichnowski, S. Paradis, D. Fer,
T. Low, and K. Goldberg, “Superhuman surgical peg transfer using
depth-sensing and deep recurrent neural networks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2012.12844, 2020.
[16] D. Meli, E. Tagliabue, D. Dall’Alba, and P. Fiorini, “Autonomous
tissue retraction with a biomechanically informed logic based framework,” in 2021 International Symposium on Medical Robotics (ISMR).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–7.

[17] E. Tagliabue, D. Meli, D. Dall’Alba, and P. Fiorini, “Deliberation
in autonomous robotic surgery: a framework for handling anatomical uncertainty,” in 2022 International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2022, pp. 11 080–11 086.
[18] C. D’Ettorre, S. Zirino, N. N. Dei, A. Stilli, E. De Momi, and D. Stoyanov, “Learning intraoperative organ manipulation with context-based
reinforcement learning,” International Journal of Computer Assisted
Radiology and Surgery, vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 1419–1427, 2022.
[19] E. Tagliabue, D. Dall’Alba, M. Pfeiffer, M. Piccinelli, R. Marin,
U. Castellani, S. Speidel, and P. Fiorini, “Data-driven intra-operative
estimation of anatomical attachments for autonomous tissue dissection,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, pp. 1856–1863, 2021.
[20] A. Pore, E. Tagliabue, M. Piccinelli, D. Dall’Alba, A. Casals, and
P. Fiorini, “Learning from demonstrations for autonomous soft-tissue
retraction,” in 2021 International Symposium on Medical Robotics
(ISMR). IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–7.
[21] P. M. Scheikl, B. Gyenes, T. Davitashvili, R. Younis, A. Schulze, B. P.
Müller-Stich, G. Neumann, M. Wagner, and F. Mathis-Ullrich, “Cooperative assistance in robotic surgery through multi-agent reinforcement
learning,” in 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2021, pp. 1859–1864.
[22] A. Pore, D. Corsi, E. Marchesini, D. Dall’Alba, A. Casals, A. Farinelli,
and P. Fiorini, “Safe reinforcement learning using formal verification
for tissue retraction in autonomous robotic-assisted surgery,” in 2021
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS). IEEE, 2021, pp. 4025–4031.
[23] T. Huang, K. Chen, B. Li, Y.-H. Liu, and Q. Dou, “Guided reinforcement learning with efficient exploration for task automation of surgical
robot,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.09772, 2023.
[24] Y. Long, W. Wei, T. Huang, Y. Wang, and Q. Dou, “Human-in-theloop embodied intelligence with interactive simulation environment
for surgical robot learning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters,
2023.
[25] A. Munawar, Y. Wang, R. Gondokaryono, and G. S. Fischer, “A realtime dynamic simulator and an associated front-end representation
format for simulating complex robots and environments,” in 2019
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS). IEEE, 2019, pp. 1875–1882.
[26] F. Faure, C. Duriez, H. Delingette, J. Allard, B. Gilles, S. Marchesseau,
H. Talbot, H. Courtecuisse, G. Bousquet, I. Peterlik, and S. Cotin,
SOFA: A Multi-Model Framework for Interactive Physical Simulation.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 283–321.
[27] P. Schegg, E. Ménager, E. Khairallah, D. Marchal, J. Dequidt, P. Preux,
and C. Duriez, “Sofagym: An open platform for reinforcement learning
based on soft robot simulations,” Soft Robotics, pp. 410–430, 2023.
[28] M. Macklin, M. Müller, and N. Chentanez, “Xpbd: Position-based
simulation of compliant constrained dynamics,” in Proceedings of the
9th International Conference on Motion in Games, 2016, p. 49–54.
[29] M. Macklin, K. Storey, M. Lu, P. Terdiman, N. Chentanez, S. Jeschke,
and M. Müller, “Small steps in physics simulation,” in Proceedings
of the 18th Annual ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on
Computer Animation, ser. SCA ’19, 2019.
[30] M. Macklin, K. Erleben, M. Müller, N. Chentanez, S. Jeschke,
and Z. Corse, “Local optimization for robust signed distance field
collision,” Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., vol. 3, no. 1,
may 2020.
[31] M. Müller, M. Macklin, N. Chentanez, S. Jeschke, and T.-Y. Kim, “Detailed rigid body simulation with extended position based dynamics,”
Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 101–112, 2020.
[32] M. Macklin and M. Muller, “A constraint-based formulation of stable
neo-hookean materials,” in Motion, Interaction and Games, 2021.
[33] M. Müller, M. Macklin, N. Chentanez, and S. Jeschke, “Physically
based shape matching,” Computer Graphics Forum, pp. 1–7, 2022.
[34] M. Macklin, “Warp: A high-performance python framework for gpu
simulation and graphics,” https://github.com/nvidia/warp, March 2022,
nVIDIA GPU Technology Conference (GTC).
[35] D. Makoviichuk and V. Makoviychuk, “rl-games: A high-performance
framework for reinforcement learning,” https://github.com/Denys88/rl_
games, May 2021.
[36] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov,
“Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
[37] G. Brockman, V. Cheung, L. Pettersson, J. Schneider, J. Schulman, J. Tang, and W. Zaremba, “Openai gym,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.

